ABSTRACT

This article presents the architecture of MemorIA, an integrative system that combines existing AI technologies into a coherent
educational framework for creating interactive historical agents, with the aim of fostering students’ learning interest. MemorIA
generates animated digital portraits of historical figures, synchronizing facial expressions with synthesized speech to enable natu-
ral conversations with students. The system leverages NVIDIA Audio2Face for real-time facial animation with first-order motion
model for portrait manipulation, achieving fluid interaction through low-latency audio-visual streaming. To assess our architec-
ture in a field situation, we conducted a pilot study in middle school history classes, where students and teachers engaged in direct
conversation with a virtual Julius Caesar during Roman history lessons. Students asked questions about ancient Rome, receiving
contextually appropriate responses. While qualitative feedback suggests a positive trend toward increased student participation,
some weaknesses and ethical considerations emerged. Based on this assessment, we discuss implementation challenges, suggest
architectural improvements, and explore potential applications across various disciplines.

% Content of the paper
\section{Related Work}

\section{Introduction}
Active learning, which places students at the center of the process and emphasizes participation over passive reception, is a pedagogical approach often recognized for its cognitive benefits and positive influence on emotions \cite{Mayer2014}. It can foster deeper knowledge construction \cite{Moreno2000}, while also potentially enhancing motivation and a sense of personal relevance \cite{Hulleman2009}. Conversational agents, with their ability to facilitate dynamic and adaptive dialogue, may serve as suitable tools for implementing these principles. They can transform learning into an interactive exchange, where the learner becomes an engaged participant rather than a passive receiver. Moreno et al. \cite{Moreno2007} highlighted the role of dialogue in multimedia learning environments, suggesting it as an important element for knowledge construction.  Reicherts et al. \cite{Reicherts2022} also noted the potential benefits of voice interaction in terms of fluency and naturalness, elements that could enhance engagement in a conversational context. The study by Pataranutaporn et al. \cite{Pataranutaporn2023} on "Living Memories" offers empirical support for the potential of interaction with historical AI agents in fostering engagement. Their "interactive digital memories," which leverage GPT-3 to generate contextual responses from historical figures, demonstrated a positive impact on participants' curiosity, their perception of learning effectiveness, and their motivation/enjoyment. These findings suggest that interaction with historical AI agents, even in a text-based format, may serve as a notable factor in engagement, potentially stimulating curiosity and making learning more motivating. MemorIA, by offering real-time oral interaction, builds on this work through voice communication and expressive facial animations. Conversational interactivity, when thoughtfully designed, may foster student engagement by providing an active, personalized approach to historical exploration. This format enables direct exchanges with historical figures, potentially making abstract historical concepts more tangible for students.

\section{Related Work}

\subsection{Embodied Agents: Fostering Social and Emotional Connection}
Alongside interaction, the visual representation of a conversational agent plays a significant role in how learners perceive and engage with the system. The agent is not merely a tool or a functional interface, it serves as a character, a social entity with which the learner may develop a relationship. Social agency theory, supported by the work of Mayer et al. \cite{Mayer2012} and Moreno et al. \cite{Moreno2001}, posits that learners tend to employ social perception and interaction schemas when interacting with computers, particularly when the computer is embodied by a visual agent. This embodiment representation goes beyond mere aesthetic considerations, but rather activates specific psychological mechanisms that shape student engagement and motivation. Research has identified several key factors contributing to these mechanisms. The work of Baylor et al. \cite{Baylor2009} and Domagk et al. \cite{Domagk2010} has highlighted how visual presence and agent appearance influence learner motivation, specifically, how an agent perceived as visually attractive and competent can improve engagement and foster a positive attitude toward the subject matter. Wang et al. \cite{Wang2021} demonstrated that agents displaying positive emotions and human-like vocal characteristics proved more effective in enhancing learner motivation and affective states. Additionally, research by Alemdag et al. \cite{Alemdag2022} and Lee et al. \cite{Sanghoon2015} revealed how embodied visual presence contributes to inducing a sense of social presence , i.e. the impression of interacting with a present being, which strengthens emotional engagement and motivation. Through these elements, learners apply their natural social and affective interaction patterns, typically reserved for human exchanges, to their interactions with the agent. This social cognitive framework enables students to form projections of intentions, emotions, and personality onto the agent, leading to deeper emotional investment in the learning process \cite{Kim2006}.

\subsection{Contextualized Emotional Expressiveness}
While an embodied visual representation may lay the foundation for social and emotional connection, the agent's emotional expressiveness could play an important role in bringing this connection to life and making it more meaningful. Beyond a humanized appearance, an agent capable of expressing a range of contextually appropriate emotions might become more credible, engaging, and emotionally resonant for the learner \cite{Yanqing2023, Oker2020}. Conversely, an agent lacking emotional expressiveness, or whose emotions appear generic and non-contextualized, might risk seeming artificial or mechanical, potentially limiting its ability to engage \cite{Liew2016}. Horovitz et al. \cite{Horovitz2021}, in their study on the impact of emotions displayed by virtual instructors, provided empirical support for the importance of emotional expressiveness. Their results indicate that learners may perform better and be more motivated when instructors (human or virtual) display relevant and engaging emotions, such as enthusiasm and interest. These studies establish emotions as an integral component of pedagogical communication that shapes learning effectiveness. These findings highlight the pedagogical importance of emotional expressiveness, but the challenge lies in its technical implementation. The following section describes the current state of animation technologies and their capabilities.
